From workplace interaction to how we commute, to our social life - the pandemic affected pretty much all we do as humans. While its effect on family interaction may be subtle at first glance, in reality, it has been grave. There has rather been a different trend in divorce and birth rates in the US since COVID hit. In this article, we will discuss some statistical findings on the effect of the pandemic on birth rate, marriages and divorce. Let’s dive in.

## Birth rates are declining!

Since 2012, there has been a steady decrease of 2% in the birth rate. However, the number doubled between 2019 and 2020. According to Beth Jarosz, the birth rate in 2020 is the [lowest in decades](https://edition.cnn.com/2022/05/24/health/cdc-birth-rate-2021/index.html). Other countries such as Italy, Portugal, Spain and Hungary also experienced a 9, 6.6, 8.4, and 8.5% [decline in birth rates](https://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2105709118). This decline also aligns with observations during past global crises. There was an equal dip in the birth rate during the influenza of 1918 and the economic collapse of 2008.

But is there some explanation for the low birth rate as per the pandemic? The closure of schools due to COVID inhibited the operations of child care institutions and required parents to take up the tasks themselves. A study by the [US Census Bureau](https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/08/parents-juggle-work-and-child-care-during-pandemic.html) found that women were 68.8% more likely to quit their jobs for childcare than men. Although many pundits thought that the stay-at-home policy would lead to a baby boom post-pandemic, the opposite was the case. One of the reasons for the declining birth rate is the increased stress on women due to child care.

Another reason for the drop is the uncertainties that came with the pandemic. Parents could not predict whether the lockdown would be lifted the next day, or whether the number of cases would increase. Also, the economic harshness of the pandemic played a key role. The pandemic greeted many countries with severe economic realities. [Parents would rather postpone childbirth](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-pandemic-caused-a-baby-bust-not-a-boom/) until they are more financially stable than put themselves under financial strain.

But the 2021 data shows a glimmer of hope. According to a recent report by the [Center for Disease Control](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/VSRR20.pdf), there was a 1% increase in the birth rate in 2021. This was the first increase in seven years. There was also a 1% increase in the fertility rate (56.6 births per 1000 women of ages 15 to 44). But one year may be too short a period to infer that the dip has ended. Nevertheless, the postponement of childbirth from 2020 to 2021 is a relatable reason for the increased birth rate in 2021.

## Marriages are on hold

The lockdown created limited physical human interaction, which by extension affected the rate of marriages and wedding ceremonies. In a [study](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01490400.2020.1774016?cookieSet=1) by Lehmiller, Justin, there have been increased conflicts in relationships due to the lockdown. The pandemic allowed partners to spend more time with each other, which led to more petty arguments and quarrels. Partners who spent time together were more likely to step on each other’s toes than those who do not. The frequent misunderstandings in relationships were aggravated by the financial constraint the pandemic brought. Couples could literally be torn apart deciding what credit plan they should go for.

A study by [Bowling Green State University](https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/tdfvc/) investigated the rate of marriages in five states in the US after the pandemic. It was observed that all the states experienced a decline in marriage even though two later bounced back. Florida had 28,000 fewer messages. Arizona had a 36% dip in marriages while Missouri's figure stood at 21%. At the core of this marriage decline, is the lack of financial wherewithal to foot marriage bills. Professor Amanda Miller, a sociologist, pointed out that an average marriage costs approximately $34,000. Prospective couples would rather postpone their marriages than put themselves in severe financial problems.

Marriages have been declining in the US since 2016 but pandemics worsened it. According to the Center for Disease Control, there were about 1.6 million marriages throughout the year. This is a 16% drop from the previous year and the [lowest figure since 1963](https://chicago.suntimes.com/2022/5/18/23126072/marriage-down-cdc-covid-pandemic). But the pandemic didn’t stop at inhibiting new marriages, it also fueled the annihilation of existing ones.

## Divorce is skyrocketing.

As already explained, the pandemic amplified conflicts that already existed in marriages. Alongside the economic crisis and homeschooling stress, many couples decided to call it quits as during and after the pandemic. By April 2020, there was a [34% increase](https://nypost.com/2020/09/01/divorce-rates-skyrocket-in-u-s-amid-covid-19/) in divorce filing in the US. A whopping 20% of couples who have been married for less than five months filed for divorce. This was a sharp increase from the 11% in 2019. Experts attribute this high figure to increased tension which could lead to domestic violence in extreme cases. The demise of a loved one or personal illness may have also induced mental stress, which hurts relationships. In fact, data by [Legal Templates](https://nypost.com/2020/09/01/divorce-rates-skyrocket-in-u-s-amid-covid-19/) revealed that 31% of partners admitted that the pandemic caused some intense damage to their relationship.

## Projections for the Future

The numbers look gloomy but the effect of the pandemic looks to be fading off as time progresses. Given the slight increase in the birth rate in 2021, one could speculate that there would be another increase in 2022 and that marriages and divorce would recover going forward.
