Jeevaka Dassanayake’s career has spanned three industries with a focus in finance where his understanding of low-level systems architecture and operating systems gives him an advantage.  The financial industry is highly automatized.  When it comes to algorithmic trading, sophisticated software systems make split-second decisions where nanoseconds matter.  When performance is key, professionals like Jeevaka invest time seeking improvements through innovative algorithms, software performance testing, code and system tuning and other techniques.  Those improvements might be quite tiny at face value, but they compound into major returns over time as the trading opportunities vanish quickly and often only the first to respond to the market event gets to participate.

Growing up in Sri Lanka, the first computer Jeevaka’s had access to was a Sinclair ZX Spectrum (sometimes called the “British Commodore”).  He and his brother learned BASIC and later Assembly language on this machine.  One project in particular was a chess playing program based on heuristic techniques which (amazingly) he had the patience and sanity to develop in Assembly language.  Today’s computers are unimaginably powerful compared to the 64K / 10Mhz Sinclair ZX.  Under these constraints, programmers had to be particularly clever to fit complex data structures into limited memory and algorithms to complete in a reasonable time. His fascination with hardware architecture has remained with him as CPUs evolved into superscalar multi-core CPUs supported by multilevel caches. 

Assembly is the “lowest level” of the programming stack.  It involves issuing specific instructions to the CPU at a level so exhaustive, the code is often error prone and hard to read and describe, even by its own author.  Today, most programmers agree that assembly language generation is a task best left to a compiler.  Yet, examining generated assembly code often gives clues to C++ code changes that lead to performance improvements. 

As time progressed, more software tools became available.  Now, programmers can select higher level programming languages and software frameworks which are described as being “higher level” as they abstract away the low level operations of the CPU and the operating system.  While developers get many benefits out of higher level features like memory management and garbage collection, these services come at a performance cost.  The limitations of early consumer computers like the Sinclair ZX made their users keenly aware of the role of memory, cpu, and disk in the operations of a computer.

His early education had an emphasis on math, physics, and chemistry.  Had a computer science undergraduate program been available, Jeevaka might have gone that route.  Instead, his academic path was into electrical and electronic engineering.  Degree in hand, he began his first major professional role as a systems engineer.

The company provided a novel service which would not be offered in the same manner now.  Today, optical character recognition (OCR) technology is so advanced, many studies suggest the best trained machines perform at or above human expert level.  This technology is fully commoditized and offered via software APIs which provide near instant OCR at costs that are a fraction of a penny.  Despite current ubiquity, it was only a few years ago that OCR software was considered unusable in most industries.

In the absence of automation, the company provided a high quality, human-powered OCR solution.  In contrast to the embarrassing mistakes made by the algorithms of the time, they were able to stake their business on a guarantee of quality by making the accuracy of their output a factor in the amount they were paid.

With accuracy a key focus of optimization, Jeevaka had several opportunities to make contributions to the company’s effort via software solutions.  Even the best human operators are going to make some mistakes.  The inclusion of techniques such as automated multi-language spell checking, flagging of common mistakes such as phrase duplication proved to be impactful in assisting the human transcribers amplify their efforts.

In his second major professional step, Jeevaka switched roles, industries, and countries.  He moved from Sri Lanka to Singapore to work in the SCADA industry at a company focused on projects like factory automation and smart buildings.  There he got experience working on programmable logic arrays and other technologies that required a strong expertise in both software and hardware to deliver an end-to-end solution.

After several years there, he switched to the finance industry where he’s been ever since.  In the remainder of this post, we’ll cover one example of a business problem, some of the methods deployed, and career advice we got in our conversation with Jeevaka.

Finance is an industry famous for hyper optimization.  Small gains can be aggregated into large fortunes, so nearly every aspect of investment decision making can benefit from improved automation, decision making, and code optimizations, just to name a few areas one can work in.  Managing market, credit, regulatory and operational risks is an integral part of any financial institution. 

Jeevaka’s first role in finance was to work on a foregin exchange trading system used by many large international banks at the time.  Let’s briefly look into what is involved.

Imagine a company from your country which intends to do a large portion of its business in another country, for example, with offshore manufacturing.  The company’s expenses will be in the foreign currency while the income will be in the local currency. The exchange rate between the two countries changes continuously and can be unfavorable when the company wants to make a large payment in the foreign currency. This poses a risk to the company and makes planning difficult.

Many successful companies maintain success by focusing on what they do best.  Subjecting their profit to the whims of exchange rates is not in their best interest.  This situation enabled the emergence of a financial product that offers multi-national businesses a way to reduce or eliminate this risk with a guaranteed exchange rate.  While no one can predict exactly what may happen to exchange rates over the next few months, a bank with the right financial models can create a probability distribution of possible future rates and a point estimate, say the expected value. It requires availability of the right data sets, the understanding of the economic systems at play, and knowledge of the right mathematical techniques. Now the bank can offer the company to exchange a certain sum of local currency into the foreign currency on a specific future date at a specific rate. This rate would be the expected value above adjusted slightly to compensate for the risk that the bank is taking. If the company agrees and enters into a contract, it is called a foreigh exchange futures contract.  Another kind of contracts called option contracts allow the company to do the exchange only if the rate has moved unfavorably and keep the extra profit if the rate has moved favorably.  The bank charges an upfront fee for option contracts. There are many more sophisticated contract types.

Such products are appealing to a business without extra funds needed to cover unfavorable rate changes and the resources to dedicate to focusing on exchange rate prediction and planning.  Yet, offering this product can place a large amount of risk on the bank.  When the bank enters into many such contracts with many companies the bank ends up having an ever changing large portfolio of such contracts.  While some contracts may offset each other to some extent and the sum risk is lower due to diversification, the bank needs to evaluate risks posed by various potential exchange rate changes of multiple currencies over different time horizons.  Without closed form formulas, the system depends on numerical methods and monte carlo techniques for this.  The faster the software, the more scenarios it can evaluate and be more accurate. 

Except in limited scenarios, finance is an area where machine learning is not particularly popular.  This is because the time series of an asset price is a random process. Even in the case of many other variables which are not fully random, it is hard to apply machine learning because the number of inputs is large and their interactions are not stable enough for a model to learn. To date, statistical methods, some of which are highly specialized for the exact area they are used, dominate most of the techniques used in finance.

Explainability is a critical component of approaches adopted in finance, sometimes mandated by regulators.  When decisions need to be performed in real time, they need to be made autonomously, and new types of risks are created.  A software bug could start a cascading problem of failures costing a company millions of dollars in a very short period of time.  The data cannot be monitored in real time, but it can be deeply analyzed after the fact.  After a particular incident, an audit will be conducted demanding a satisfying explanation for why certain decisions were made.  It requires a professional that is knowledgeable about the system with access to the right tools to give a useful answer.

To this end, at one point in his career, Jeevaka designed a system using event based architectures to make it possible to recreate a prior state of the system by re-running the same event streams through it.  In addition to audits, this replay system was used for debugging, regression testing, performance benchmarking as well as creating "what if" scenarios by manipulating some inputs. Creating these ‘what-if’ scenarios is called back testing.

Today, Jeevaka’s work involves C++, R for statistical analysis, and Python for some particular libraries.  While C++ can be hastily labeled as a legacy language, it has more than one quality that makes it attractive to the finance industry.  As mentioned, C++ is appealing when you care a lot about performance.  In addition, it also has 100% downward compatibility,  significant longevity and maturity.  With many new features added in the last decade, C++ supports many features available in newer languages while retaining its speed.

During our interview, we touched on the importance of continuing education throughout one’s career.  The foreign exchange trading problem was one he wasn’t fully equipped to take on from his education alone.  The necessary skills were picked up via independent study of textbooks.  This allowed him to understand user requirements and implement complete solutions, giving him an edge over those who depended on business analysts to translate requirements into algorithms.  In addition to techniques in the field, he also keeps up with iterations of processor technology, C++ and linux, both to keep up to date in general and to gain trading system performance improvements with new features where possible.

Jeevaka had a few insightful bits of career advice that we’ll conclude our article with now.  First, learn things with a long shelf life in depth, say math, algorithms or database theory compared to nifty tricks in a particular language with narrow applications. Jeevaka’s go-to is text books. If it’s relevant to your work, consider reading it cover to cover. Second, when building your overall skill set, pay attention to ancillary skills in addition to the skill you want to be an expert on. This is called the T-model. Also there is the 𝝿 model if one specialize in two areas. This is especially true if you start your career with a bachelor's degree and want to keep flexibility.  In the same vein, when selecting jobs, consider the experience you gain and not the short term income alone. Finally, having mentors in your career is an asset that can be undervalued.  
